The Humble Investor
==================

Copyright (c) 2017 BibhaCoder(https://github.com/BibhaCoder). All rights reserved.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Please note this is NOT a professional investment or medical advice and investor’s might lose money in securities market in short term. This is only for education and information purposes.
__________________

An investing principle and worldly wisdom for small individual common investors to achieve financial independence and live a fulfilling life.
______________________

Please note that always the best investment is investment in our personal well-being, skills development and in our mental and physical health. No investment in the world can match the returns of investing in our skills development, well-being and inturn achieving an enormous long life filled with enormous health, wealth and wisdom. Following are 5 basic fundamental concepts(keyword **AWARE**) to master for our mental and physical health and wellbeing:

1) ***A*ppreciativeness**: Daily practice of appreciativeness or **gratitude** can prevent hedonic adaptations of life and keep us focused on living in the moment and enjoying every moment of life without worrying too much about future and make us magnanimous person.
2) ***W*orkout**: Stay active and do at least one hour of daily physical workout like walking, swimming, running, cycling, yoga, playing our favorite sports, excercise in gym etc. Occasional cardio exercises are another excellent activity to do.
3) ***A*ppetite**: We are result of what we eat so chose carefully what to eat. Primarily fresh healthy plants, fruits, nuts, beans, lentils, whole grains and green leafy vegetables based diet in small portions. Intermittent fasting is another key ingredient of an excellent diet.
4) ***R*est**: Similar to being active getting enough eight to ten hours of good sleep is extremely important for our mind and body to recharge and work with full capabilities.
5) ***E*veryday Mindfulness**: Daily practice of mindfulness meditation can help to reduce anxiety and stress and boost our everyday cognitive abilities and make us a better person by cultivating empathy and compassion towards ourselves and others.

Investing field is super complex and pretending to know everything in the world of investing with our limited skull size is trying to fool ourself and achieve mediocre returns and drastically under perform market(VOO/VTI) in long run. There is so much noise, nonsense and distractions in the world of investment that a common small investor can easily get distracted and make huge mistakes by participating in dirty game of speculation because of their uncontrolled emotions. There are so many financially toxic products are available in market which can destroy the financial health of small individual investors. Primary purpose of this article is to guide small individual common investors on how to take the field of investment with humility and simplicity to achieve market beating returns in long run to achieve financial independence and become a truly successful humble investor. In modern world where average humans are living longer, its more important to achieve financial independence and intelligent investing is one of the most important tools to achieve financial independence. At the end in whatever profession we all are working, our end goal is to achieve financial independence. Investing in a successful business is same as intelligent investing in securities market and owning the best businesses of the country and growing with their growth.

Successful investing is an intellectual field of education and analysis. Trying to enter the field of investing without having this basic education is like trying to enter the field of medical surgeory without having adequate education and experience. Default human instinct is propelled by uncontrolled emotions and amygdala fuelled basic survival instincts which often does not work well in the this field considering the amount of information and misinformation is circulated every second of the day. The complexity of this field can be easily understood from the fact that 99% of actively managed(managed by highly educated and trained professionals) US equity funds underperform and fail to beat their respective passive benchmark index over long term. This article I have created after reading numerous books on investing and finally have found that these are 3 most important books on investing which a common humble investor must read before entering the field of investing:

1) Little book on common sense of investing: John C Bogle

2) The intelligent investor: Benjamin Graham

3) Common stocks and uncommon profit: Phil fisher

After reading above 3 book I have found that in modern world the field of stock investing must be dealt with humility and simplicity. A humble investor to look for following 5 key characteristics(keyword **LOGIC**) in an ETF for implementing a **core strategy** to achieve long term market beating(VOO/VTI benchmark) returns:

1) ***L*ow Cost**: Total expense ration must be <= 0.15 and absolutely no enter/exit load fees and no commissions.

2) ***O*ptimally Passively Managed**: Track a proven market cap weighted major broad optimal stock index which is at least a decade old(**survival test**) and benefit from natural selection of survival of fittest.

3) ***G*rowth**: Focused on holding best available **fundamentally strong growing** business in the country with **reasonable** trailing 12 months **PE ratio** in comparison to VOO.

4) ***I*nnovation**: Focused on holding best available **fundamentally strong innovative** businesses in the country with **reasonable** trailing 12 months **PE ratio** in comparison to VOO.

3) ***C*oncentration**: To have higher concentrated allocation to growing and innovative [**S&P sectors**](https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/knowledge/finance/the-sp-sectors/) in various market conditions and avoid over diversification.

Instead of doing speculation and trying to invest in risky and speculative securities/assets a humble investor may look for above 5 characteristics or tests in ETFs and invest in them for very very long term(**forever**). A humble investor’s ETF must have very low total expense ration <= 0.15 with absolutely no enter and exit fees(loads) or commissions such that the humble investor makes most of the earned money and not the investment management firm. It must also be optimally passively managed with full-replication approach and track a proven solid index which is at least 10 years old and avoid new experimental risky indices which are not proven yet. Please note that the entire gain in the U.S. stock-market since 1926 is attributable to only 4% of the stocks thats means combined 96% listed stocks are losers(only match treasury bill return) in long term in this brutal competitive world. A humble investor must only rely on time tested and proven indices and avoid getting trapped into marketing gimmicks of investment management firms. Passively managed ETFs helps us to easily stick with our chosen investment philosophy and avoids human emotion trigerred mistakes and improve tax efficiency by avoiding frequent portfolio turn overs. Passively managed market cap weighted index replicates nature's law of survival of fittest and underperforming businesses are automaticaly removed from the index. Superiority of passive index based investing is explained in detail in research paper [Why Indexing Works](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2673262). A humble investor must avoid actively managed ETFs and actively managed mutual funds because actively managed funds deteriorate over time and underperform their respective passive benchmark index over long run because of following 4 reasons:

1) High costs.
2) Tax inefficiency because of frequent tradings.
3) Genuinely unskilled professional management.
4) Skewness of always picking the winner stocks(Only 4% of stocks drive all the results).

Please note that short term out performance by an active manager is 100% attributable to luck, infact it requires minimum 22 years of consistent outperformance(compare to their respective passive benchmark index) to know if a professional manager is 90% skilled. Even best of the best active professionals and fund managers fail to beat their passive benchmark consistently over very long time. Active managed funds also eat up a large portion of investors profits because of high management fees and tax inefficiencies because of very frequent portfolio turn overs. A humble investor’s ETF must also be highly concentrated to avoid over diversification and have higher allocations to growing and innovative sectors. A humble investor's ETF must has strong fundamentals and have reasonable and solid 12 months trailing PE ratio compare to VOO and be focused on holding best available innovative and growing businesses. Innovation and growth are key for long term success of any business so look for ETFs which are made of fundamentally strong innovative and growing businesses. Please note that from a business point of view innovation and growth are same thing because without constant innovation a business can't grow and a business which is not growing that means its constantly not innovating as well. A humble investor must avoid ETFs which have no 12 months trailing PE ratio or very high unreasonable bloated 12 months trailing PE ratios.

A humble investor does not need 20 to 50 non leveraged ETFs to get proper diversification in a core portfolio. Only three non leveraged ETFs selected based on above 5 characteristics and tests are good enough for the core portfolio for a humble investor to achieve long term market beating(VOO/VTI) returns. And finally holding period for a humble investor should be forever. A humble investor must completely avoid moving around and frequent tradings. A humble investor must only be focused on periodic buying and this way achieve behavioral alpha which also helps to beat market averages(VOO/VTI) by significant margin in long run. Please note that successful investing does not require very high intelligence. Successful investing requires a cool and stable temprament. A humble investor should focus on achieving excellence at their respective profession and keeping their everyday expenses low such that maximum savings can be invested with the principles of humble investing and let the magic of compounding work for them in long term to achieve financial independence. Basically idea of humble investing is to invest in highly concentrated group of best innovative and growing businesses of your country with lowest possible cost and over long run grow together with your country's growth. The moment common small investors realizes the ground reality of investing world(filled with noise, nonsense and distractions) and stick with above 5 basic principles of humble investing(**LOGIC**) they beat 99% of active investors and fund managers over long run.

So far after evaluating hundreds of non leveraged ETFs for implementing the core strategy, I have found very few ETFs which consistently pass all the above mentioned 5 tests(**LOGIC**) of humble investing and the ones which I like and appreciate for their extremely low cost, high concentration of fundamentally strong growing and innovative businesses and their solid proven passive strategy for more than last 17+ years to have high higher allocations to growing and innovative S&P sectors in various rotating market conditions. Please note that there could be more equally good ETFs in the market which may consistently pass all above 5 tests and could be part of a humble investor's core portfolio. Below mentioned ETFs are just examples to demonstrate the strength of humble investing principles and it's consistent market beating performance. Following is their basic fundamentals and performance in comparison with VOO benchmark for implementing the **core strategy**:

|  NAV return                            | VOO(S&P 500)     | VUG               | MGK               | NDX               | VGT               |
|  ----                                  | ----             | ----              | ----              | ----              | ----              |
| Net expense ratio                      | (0.03)           | (0.04)            | (0.07)            | (0.15)            | (0.10)            |
| PE ratio(03/31/22)                     | (20.00)          | (29.60)           | (29.90)           | (25.60)           | (25.30)           |
| Dividend yield (03/31/22)              | (1.31)           | (0.45)            | (0.42)            | (0.53)            | (0.64)            |
| Annual historical volatility(06/30/22) | 20.03            | 27.30             | 27.50             | 27.40             | 28.60             |
| 3 years                                | 18.92            | 23.40             | 24.52             | 27.04             | 28.73             |
| 5 years                                | 15.99            | 19.88             | 20.72             | 23.15             | 26.43             |
| 10 years                               | 14.64            | 16.35             | 16.94             | 19.42             | 20.20             |
| Best year                              | 53.99(1933)      | 40.17(2020)       | 40.99(2020)       | 101.95(1999)      | 61.74(2009)       |
| Worst year                             | -43.34(1931)     | -38.22(2008)      | -36.47(2008)      | -41.68(2008)      | -42.83(2008)      |
| Max drawdown                           | -86.6(1929-1932) | -47.18(2007-2009) | -45.43(2007-2009) | -81.08(2000-2002) | -50.58(2007-2009) |
| Measurement start year                 | (1928)           | (2004)            | (2007)            | (1986)            | (2004)            |
| Since measurement start                | (9.86)           | (11.29)           | (12.95)           | (13.80)           | (13.27)           |

A humble investor may also employ [S&P broad sector sepcifc ETF](https://investor.vanguard.com/etf/list?assetclass=sec#/etf/asset-class/month-end-returns) in core portfolio if its built around fundamentally strong innovative and growing businesses and passes all above 5 tests consistently. A humble investor should be careful and avoid new market trendy, thematic and catchy subsector sepcifc ETFs whose underlying index/market sector is not yet proven to be growing and innovative and has not survived past 10 years of survival test. Many new catchy and thematic ETFs are created every year and close in next couple of years because of not having underlying strong fundamentals. Approximately 10% of total ETFs close every year because of unskilled active management and their flawed underlying index strategy so 10 years survival test of underlying index is very important. Most of the time very 1st test of low cost(total expense ratio <= 0.15) should be able to filter out majority of new unproven trendy sub-sector ETFs as most of these new trendy ETFs are marketing propagandas and primarily launched to make money from their high fees by looking trendy and attractive to new investors.

A humble investor may also employ **Core(x%)** and **Alpha(100 - x%)** strategy. **Core strategy** consists of buying and holding forever three non leveraged ETFs selected based on above 5 principles. **Alpha strategy** may consist of a safe and disciplined 3x S&P 500 index leveraged ETF to boost the long term returns. Alpha strategy is based on following 2 simple rules:
1) **Rule no 1**: Buy and hold 3x leveraged S&P 500 ETF(UPRO) whenever S&P 500 index closes above its 10 months simple moving average to boost long term returns. **ELSE**
2) **Rule no 2**: Buy and hold unleveraged S&P 500 ETF(VOO) whenever S&P 500 index closes below its 10 months simple moving average to avoid volatility decay.

Please note above 2 simple rules always keep the alpha portfolio invested in securities market and avoids jumping in and out of the security market by either staying in leveraged 3x S&P 500 ETF or staying in unleveraged S&P 500 ETF with on average four trades per year. Basic idea of alpha strategy is very simple act of balance to use leverage safely only when leverage is handsomely rewarded in low volatility environment and deleverage to plain S&P 500 ETF to manage risk when leverage decays in high volatility environment. Obviously it's wiser to use large containers when it's raining gold. Young individual small investors who have very little amount of money to invest its more sensible and intelligent approach to use a safe and disciplined less volatile proven broad stock market index based 3x leveraged ETFs to get more exposure to securities market and boost long-term returns in tax deferred IRA/HSA accounts. Leveraged FTF total expense ration must be less than 1.0 percent and it must track a solid less volatile proven major broad stock index like S&P 500. Natural safe leverage can also be achieved to boost long term returns by periodically investing large sum of saved money to get greater exposure to the market as part of core strategy. All other types of dangerous leverages like borrowing money from home or at a high interest rates(credit cards) etc. must be avoided at all costs. Modern days leveraged ETFs are best ways to get leverage and more exposure to securities market with lowest possible cost. By using 3x leveraged ETF based on a major broad stock market index(S&P 500 index) risk is dramatically reduced. By investing in 3x leveraged S&P500 index based ETF only risk is systematic compensated broader market risk and all other uncompensated risks of speculative stocks/ETFs picking is completely eliminated. Do not look for needle in the haystack instead buy the entire haystack. Small common investors should focus on their well-being and enjoying every day life and never worry about the noise and distractions of securities market activities.

As part of **alpha strategy** a humble investor may employ modern investing platforms **stop loss** sell orders to automatically exit the leveraged ETF position based on above 2 simple rules passively without any active involvement and any personal emotional triggers. Please note that a person's uncontrolled emotions are biggest hurdles in the path of successful investing. Standard market risk was always there and will always be even in future. If any person wants to see the most dangerous risk then she/he should sit idle and simply focus on their breathing(mindfulness meditation) and mindfully watch their uncontrolled thoughts(approximately 50 thoughts per minute) and emotions to realize that the actual biggest risk is residing in their mind as form of amygdala fuelled uncontrolled thoughts and emotions. Modern investing platforms have evolved for good reasons and made it very easy to employ a passive hands off automated alpha strategy. As a human being we should remember our evolution from great apes which makes us biologically prone to herd and croud mentality. Following herd or crowd is the biggest mistake investors can do. Smart and intelligent investors should keep themselves detached from the crowd and stay focused on their chosen investment principles through thick and thin. Once **enough exposure**(first 40 years) to securities market is achieved via **alpha** strategy, it may be **merged** with **core** strategy and then use the **core strategy**(next 40 years) for very very long term(**forever**).

In today's market leveraged ETF UPRO (3x S&P 500) can be used for implementing the alpha strategy. Using modern investing platforms stop loss sell orders and UPRO ETF this alpha strategy can be easily passively implemented in IRA/HSA tax deferred account. As part of alpha passive automated long term strategy suppose for example if current S&P 500 index long term simple moving average is at SMA and today's S&P500 closing value is at CV and today's UPRO closing value is at U then passive automated stop loss sell order for next day may be kept at UPRO value  = ceiling (U - ((0.02 * (SMA / CV)) * U)) to cleanly rotate to unleveraged S&P 500 ETF(VOO) at slightly better value based on above 2 simple rules. Broad S&P 500 index based 3x leveraged ETF gets benefit from **circuit breakers** to avoid complete loss in any abnormal day. U.S. regulations have three levels of [circuit breakers](https://personal.vanguard.com/us/content/Funds/FundsToolsCircuitBreakersJSP.jsp), which are set to halt trading on all exchanges whenever S&P 500 Index drops 7%(level 1), 13%(level 2), and 20%(level 3) in all exchanges. These 3 levels of **circuit breakers** and automated **stop loss** sell order can help to rotate to unleveraged VOO whenever S&P 500 index moves below 10 months simple moving average and avoid 100% loss. Following is performance of **alpha strategy** in comparision to VOO benchmark derived from [portfolio visualizer](https://www.portfoliovisualizer.com/test-market-timing-model) back testing models and research paper [Leverage for the long run](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2741701):

| NAV return                            | VOO(S&P 500)     | Alpha strategy   |
|  ----                                 | ----             | ----             |
| Net expense ratio                     | (0.03)           | (0.64**)         |
| PE ratio(03/31/22)                    | (20.00)          | (20.00)          |
| Dividend yield (03/31/22)             | (1.31)           | (0.49**)         |
| Annual historical Volatility(6/30/22) | 20.03            | 40.04            |
| 3 years                               | 14.30            | 30.12            |
| 5 years                               | 11.88            | 26.80            |
| 10 years                              | 13.12            | 31.05            |
| Best year                             | 53.99(1933)      | 118.50(2013)     |
| Worst year                            | -43.34(1931)     | -49.62(1931)     |
| Max drawdown                          | -86.6(1929-1932) | -92.2(1929-1932) |
| Measurement start year                | (1928)           | (1928)           |
| Since measurement start               | (9.86)           | (27.24)          |

** Please note that actual expense ratio of alpha strategy will vary each year between 0.03(VOO) to 0.91(UPRO) depending upon how many days in a year the alpha strategy is invested in VOO vs UPRO. On average yearly expense ratio of alpha strategy should be around 0.64 considering 70% of time alpha strategy being invested in UPRO and 30% of time alpha being invested in VOO. Similarly actual annual dividend yield of alpha strategy will vary between 0.15(UPRO dividend yield) and 1.31(VOO dividend yield) depending upon how many days in a year alpha strategy is invested in UPRO vs VOO.

We should be very careful in chosing role models in our life. We should chose very carefully, who we want imitate in our life and pick the people whom we want to mimick very carefully. At the end life is much more than just plain earnign money. A successful human life consists of 4 key characteristics:

1) An **enormous long life**
2) Filled with **enormous health**
3) Filled with **enormous wealth** and
4) Filled with **enormous wisdom**

Cultivating growth mindset is very important for living a successful and meaningful life. Growth mindset has its roots in neuroscience and a concept called brain placiticity which means neurons connections between our brains changes with learning. Individuals with growth mindset believe that their talents can be developed through hard work, good strategies, and input from others. No one is born as a good or bad human being. Every human being has potential to use growth mindset and achieve excellence in their life. Please note that neuroscience has already confirmed that  nurture is more important than nature. Individuals with growth mindset believes that they can achieve anything in their life if they set mind on it. Growth mindset encourages learning process over results and gives more importance to enjoying the journey and the process of putting genuine wholehearted effort irrespective of whatever is end result. People with growth mindsets know that they can handle any situation and thrive in every environment which life throws on their way. Growth mindset people are problem solvers and in addition to improving their and their families life they also improve life's of other countless individuals.

For a successful, meaningful and fulfilling human life we should focus on nurturing and cultivating **Growth Mindset** and all 24 human **Character Strengths** to be a better human for our spouse, kids, family, friends and our society in every aspect. Every human being is special and unique with respect to their signature character strengths. Character strength has its roots in science of positive psychology which gives more importance to nurturing what is best about human beings across different human cultures and societies. My personal signature character strengths are: judgment(rational and critical thinking), love of learning, bravery, perserverence(resilience and grit), zest, kindness(compassion), social intelligence, leadership, self regulation, humility, gratitude and sprituality.  

**24 Character Strengths** to cultivate for being a better human  being for our spouse, kids, family, friends, society  and complete humanity are:

1) **Wisdom**: Creativity, Curiosity, Judgement(Rational and Critical thinking), Love of learning, Perspective
2) **Courage**: Bravery, Perserverence, Integrity(Honesty), Zest
3) **Humanity**: Love, Kindness(Compassion), Social Intelligence(Emotional Intelligence)
4) **Justice**: Teamwork, Fairness, Leadership
5) **Temperence**: Self regulation, Prudence, Humility, Forgiveness
6) **Transendence**: Appreciation of beauty and excellence, Gratitude, Hope, Humour and Sprituality

To be successful in any professional work environment we needs character strengths like: Integrity, Social Intelligence(Emotional Intelligence), Teamwork, Fairness and Leadership. Similarly to be successful in business and investment world we need character strengths like: Judgement(Rational and Critical thinking), Love of learning, Bravery, Perserverence, Self regulation. To be successful in personal and social relationships we need character strengths like: Love, Compassion, Social Inteligence(Emotional Intelligence), Forgiveness, Humility.

The secret of a successful and fulfilling life is to achieve a **healthy balance** between various elements, thoughts and philosophies available in the universe. As the earth's balanced distance(not too far and not too close) from the sun ensures flourishing of diverse life and ecosystem on earth, similarly a healthy balance between dark matter and dark energy ensures survival of our very own universe. Every star in our universe shines because of the balance between its massive gravity crushing its core and nuclear fusion in the core trying to blow it up. Similarly for a successful and fulfilling life we need to maintain a healthy balance in our life and avoid extremes of anything.

Please note that in the field of investing high priests(hedge funds, active professional fund money managers, investment management firms etc.) have no edge over common people if common people can employ the above mentioned principles of humble investing with proper discipline. By following above simple principles of humble investing small common investors can easily achieve financial independence by becoming millionaires and billionaires over long time of investment horizon instead of making fund managers and investment management firms rich(who are already filthy rich). The less we pay for investing the more we earn at the end for ourself. Primary goal of investment management industry should be to add value to their society by making more and more people financially independent but today's majority of active fund management does exactly the opposite by underperforming their respective benchmark index and charging humongous fees which eats up capital like crazy(e.g 1% fee over 40 years could eat up 25% of total investment results). There is so much noise, nonsense and distraction circulated every day to create fear of missing out(**FOMO**) which can easily mislead small common investors to make huge mistakes and destroy their wealth. The principles of humble investing protects small common investors from outside noise and keep them focused for very long term and inturn achieve financial independence and live an enormous long life filled with enormous health, wealth and wisdom.

Copyright (c) 2017 BibhaCoder(https://github.com/BibhaCoder). All rights reserved.
---------------

